[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to top cast episode 26
we're still on the lottery verse and I
tend to be talking more than I have in
previous episodes thank you to the
people who've been supporting the
podcast by the way they're coming out
more frequently precisely because of the
additional support I've been receiving
via PayPal and patreon so thank you for
that
so we're going to be doing at least
after this one one more episode I was
intending on this being the final
episode for the multiverse but just
looking at the time that it's taken for
each of these to complete as in how long
each episode running for I wouldn't like
to make one episode go for two hours and
so for that reason this one's kind of
probably be about an hour and then the
next one will be in about an hour as
well and then that will be the last one
on the multiverse before we move on to
chapter 12 physicists history of
philosophy what we've been talking about
so far in the readings from chapter 11
is the fictional story that David is
telling in order to explain aspects of
the multiverse theory which aren't often
considered by people who explain the
multiverse theory one important aspect
of that is fungibility and today we're
going to come more directly to this idea
of entanglement as well so we're gonna
have a go at explaining that
so to recap what we had in a previous
episode was that a device called a
transporter had a voltage surge in it in
one universe but not the other this is
the quantum event the quantum event
happens in one universe but not the
other
in quantum events are typically of this
kind we've looked at half silvered
mirrors for example where a photon could
go through the mirror or bounce off
we've looked at interference experiments
of different kinds where for example
Jung's two slit experiment where if you
fire a single particle at the two slits
it could go through one or the other of
the two slits perhaps neither and
perhaps can take different paths through
both as well but there are options
within the universe about where these
particles could go in the case of the
story that David's telling the voltage
surge could have happened in the
universe or might not have happened in
the Univ
and then the effects of that voltage
surge this quantum event are amplified
up to the point where the voltage surge
where it happens jolts a particular
person and that caused them to spill
coffee and the coffee spill then leads
to them talking to the person that's
sitting next to them and romance ensues
so we end up with this emergent kind of
stream of information going on in one
universe that didn't go on in the other
okay let's continue with the book I've
skipped a substantial bit now I'm about
to skip a substantial amount more as I
emphasized in the last chapter this is
the longest chapter in the book and I am
only partially doing it justice so you
really should read the entire chapter my
videos are just to provide additional
context and exposition I suppose alright
let's continue and David writes now
suppose that scientists on the starship
know about the multiverse and understand
the physics of the transporter though
note that we have not yet given them a
way of discovering these things then
they know that when they run the
transporter an infinite number of
fungible instances themselves all
sharing the same history are doing so at
the same time they know that a voltage
surge will occur in half the universes
in that history which means that it will
split into two histories of equal
measure hence they know that if they use
the voltmeter capable of detecting the
surge half of the instances of
themselves are going to find that it has
recorded one and the other half are not
pause they're just my reflection
remember also in the last episode we
moved beyond this idea that there were
only in fact two universes that in fact
there's a an infinite number of
universes an uncountably infinite number
of universes all of which are fungible
to begin with they're all the same and
that the same number of universes is
maintained throughout any event which
causes differentiation so the idea of
the multiverse is that we have a
constant number of universes it's just
that they differentiate over time they
become different over time and so prior
to this
Serg there's a certain amount of
universes a certain measure of universes
you can't count them for reasons that
are explained previously in the book on
infinities so instead what we have is
with this idea of a measure so we have
this measure of universes considered
analogous to measuring the length using
a ruler okay there's an infinite number
of points between you know the one
center made a point in the 10 centimeter
point even though there's only nine
centimeters difference between them
there's an infinite number of points and
so instead of counting the point between
one centimeter and 10 centimeters we
measure lengths to say that there's nine
centimeters between the 1 and the 10 now
we could divide that 9 centimeters in
half to 2 4 point 5 centimeter sections
so we're talking about lengths rather
than counting points when it comes to
measuring things and so the same thing
is true here of the multiverse an
analogous thing is going on where prior
to the voltage surge happening the
measure of universes is such and then
after the voltage surge happens the
universe differentiates into two equal
proportions now it doesn't have to be
equal in the true quantum theory it can
be any old proportion that you like but
assuming the simplest case here we have
half of the universes in which the
voltage surge happens and half the
universes in which the voltage surge
does not happen and all of the well I
say I'm about to say things in those
universes but remember the universes are
nothing more over and above the things
that are in the universes it's not like
a universe is a receptacle for things as
David I said previously and so the
people in that in those universes
there's uncountably infinite numbers of
fungible instances of those people as
there are for you and as I've said
before well that seems preposterous what
on earth would it feel like to be many
different people exactly as it does now
now if you're struggling with that
concept well depending upon who you are
and perhaps you struggled when you first
perhaps figured out that you didn't have
an immortal soul and some
people who believe in the immortal soul
who are religious if they undergo a
transformation in their mind where they
realize that they don't have an immortal
soul now if you're not a religious
person you might very well be asked by a
religious person it's preposterous to
think I don't have an immortal soul I
can feel that I have an immortal soul
they're feeling their mind or they're
feeling their consciousness something
like that so I think it's no more of a
great jolt going from believing you have
an immortal soul and you have a certain
sense of having an immortal soul to no
longer believing that you have an
immortal soul this is the kind of
transition that I would think it's
analogous to going from thinking you're
just a single instance of a person in a
single universe to you are uncountably
infinite numbers of instances of people
in the multiverse you're a multiversal
object and I think this is a huge
transition okay so I'll just step back a
bit I'll reread some and then I'll move
forward again
so David wrote hence they know that if
they use a voltmeter capable of
detecting the surge half of the
instances of myths of themselves are
going to find that it has recorded one
and the other half are not but they also
know that it is meaningless to ask not
merely impossible to know which event
they will experience consequently they
can make two closely related predictions
one is that despite the perfect
determinism of everything that is
happening nothing can reliably predict
for them whether the voltmeter will
detect a surge the other prediction is
simply that the voltmeter will record a
surge with probability 1/2 thus the
outcomes of its such experiments are
subjectively random from the perspective
of any observer even though everything
that is happening is completely
determined objectively this is also the
origin of quantum mechanical randomness
and probability in real physics it is
due to the measure that the theory
provides for the multiverse which is in
turn due to what kinds of physical
processes the theory allows and forbids
notice that when a random outcome in
this sense is about to happen it is a
situation of diversity within
fungibility
the diversity is in the variable war
outcome they are going to see the logic
of the situation is the same as in cases
like that of the bank account I
discussed above except at this time the
fungible entities are people they are
fungible yet half of them are going to
see the surge and the other half are not
pause they're my reflection so it sounds
preposterous that you are made up of all
these fungible entities that there are
these many different universes but the
fact that it's surprising our standing
is not a meaning no is not a reason for
rejecting it nor a reason for getting
unduly emotional except to be curious
and interested in fascinator perhaps
positive emotions it's just what the
science is telling us but it's
remarkable to me that some people have
visceral negative reactions and so I'm
gonna have a little diversion here I'm
going to listen to a different podcast
we're just going to listen to a few
minutes of the excellent Bret
Weinstein's dark horse for lot podcast
and this is an episode in which Bret
Weinstein talks to sam harris these two
people are great intellects I love
listening to Bret Weinstein I think he's
a fantastic thinker great biologist a
person who is able to sensibly reflect
upon culture at this moment and of
course Sam Sam is a great rational
thinker typically measured in the way he
talks about things he doesn't get overly
emotional and here in what we're about
to listen to they're discussing the
multiverse now as much as I admire these
two great public intellectuals I think
here they make terrible missteps in
simply appreciating the physics and I
think it's not only because they're
stepping outside their domain of
expertise I don't have a problem with
people doing that after all this is what
I - quite often the concern I have is
they're not applying the same standards
intellectual standards to this theory
as they would to any other theory that a
scientist might have and in particular
when it comes to evolution by natural
selection all of the objections that I'm
sure that Brett hears from creationists
or other people who reject Darwinism or
neo-darwinism all of those objections
are precisely the kind of objections
there on a continuum with the objections
that he's about to raise about the
multiverse okay
so rather than go into a longer preamble
than that let's just get into listening
to the podcast by the way this is
episode 8 of Brett Weinstein's Dark
Horse podcast it can be found on YouTube
it can be found on iTunes his podcasts
typically very long conversations which
are excellent you know of the length of
two and a half hours or so we're only
going to listen to a few minutes just a
part that's about the multiverse and it
comes up in a discussion just by the way
about freewill and in terms of freewill
Sam and Brett seem to be in furious
agreement about the non-existence of
freewill so let's hear what they have to
say right yeah well so the this could be
a semantic difference between us but
let's talk about what you think that
that scintilla of freedom actually is
okay so first of all it is utterly
dependent on us not living in a
deterministic universe if we live in a
deterministic universe then I don't
understand a damn thing and it's game
over for Brett assuming we don't and I
think the physics is pretty clear
there's no reason to think we do
there's quantum uncertainty and the fact
that there is quantum uncertainty means
that uncertainty can exist at higher
levels through various mechanisms well
or we live in a universe where I mean if
you take the many-worlds picture
seriously which again it's hard to do
but many physicists do at this point Sam
has just said there that it's hard to do
it's hard to believe in this idea of the
multiverse very well many things are
hard to believe I slept
almost anything in science is hard to
believe anything of interest is hard to
believe the universe is 13.7 billion
years old now the universe is large that
it is the universe contains as many
stars that it that it does I mean these
are we have preposterous numbers to some
extent when talking about these things
the number of possible organisms that
could be produced using the DNA code
preposterous
perhaps infinite and desires now just
putting aside the fact that I don't
think that the multiverse adds too much
to this concept of free will I think
that well the concept of free will that
I have anyway this idea that it's an
emergent feature of human minds coupled
to their creativity causing them to be
able to do things that are inherently
unpredictable I don't think that that's
really helped by the multiverse but it's
certainly not made any more difficult I
don't think the multiverse really has a
lot to do with freewill to be honest but
putting that aside what is the
scientific criticism of the multiverse
that Sam and Brett are sort of about to
get into here that's what we need to
listen out for or what is the
philosophical criticism the philosophy
of science or the epistemological
criticism because Sam so far has said
it's simply hard to believe but the
feeling that something is hard or
difficult hard to take seriously it's
not a reason for rejection it could be a
reason to look into things a little bit
more deeply and of course I'm not going
to I'm not going to get into right now
the fact that Brett clearly thinks that
determinism and freewill cannot go
together okay I'm not the only one who
thinks that they can Daniel Dennett's
another person reasonable people can
have differences upon this okay and
often it comes down to these silly
definitional games and if we define
freewill in the way that people who say
they're not compatible is to be defined
well then I agree that sort of freewill
cannot possibly obtain
if free will has to mean something like
beyond the laws of physics a
supernatural force that allows you to
make choices outside of what physics
permeance
or a an uncaused cause okay if it's
something like that if that's what
freewill is then I agreed that doesn't
exist freewill cannot be supernatural
and it cannot be an uncaused cause so
I'd like to preserve the concept of free
will the kind of freewill that people
typically who believe in it I think they
think they have or at least to come to
understand it a little better and so
that's the reason I think that free will
and determinism have to go together and
if you don't want to call what I think
is free will is free will you want to
call it something else I'm okay with
that as well okay that I typically think
that when people are talking about
choices and free choices it's a very
simple concept to just use the term
freewill
I've got numerous blog posts on my
website about freewill anyway we're not
here to talk about freewill let's go
back to Bret's podcasts we live in a
world where everything that can happen
does in fact happen somewhere right and
you don't know which one of these worlds
you are in right so it's it's a new kind
of determinism
in a way which is like you know every
every gradation of possible difference
in in in this probability space which is
this conversation between us is spawning
yet another universe in which precisely
that thing is happening you know you
know as as deterministically is one
billiard ball hitting another but the
uncertainty is we don't know which one
we don't know whether we're in the
universe where we both start speaking
Mandarin right now for reasons we can't
understand or we're in the universe I'm
pretty sure we're in the universe where
we're going to stay stick with English
but whatever surprises are here are
still can still be under understood
determinate deterministically in that
picture okay so I think that's great I
think that's more or less correct
perhaps one of the misconceptions that
people have when they reject this is
that although Sam what Sam has said
there is quite true we don't know if
we're in a universe where we're going to
start speaking Mandarin all of a sudden
even though neither of them can speak
Mandarin that's a physically possible
universe some people think that it's
somehow likely or common or I don't know
what they think the mere possibility
that that is a possibility is a
refutation of the theory but it's not
there are possible organisms that one
could create using DNA that would be
absolutely astonishing but terribly
unlikely no doubt there is a physically
possible organism that can evolve which
is highly unlikely to ever evolve in the
history of our universe interestingly
enough however bizarre the organism is
if it's physically possible it will
evolve somewhere in the multiverse so
these are kind of related issues to be
to be honest but you know we could
consider imagine a scenario an
alternative history where we never had
any fossils we never had any evidence of
dinosaurs imagine that possibility it's
possible I mean dinosaurs fossils are
hard to come by
they only result under very in very rare
circumstances the dinosaur has to fall
into a you know lake of mud of just the
right kind and get covered up
immediately in an anaerobic environment
where the oxygen can't get to it and the
bacteria can't get to it so that the
bones are preserved blah blah blah
there's a lot of coincidences that have
to happen to preserve dinosaurs I can
imagine a world where dinosaur fossils
were far far far more rare than what
they are and it could have been the case
that by 2020 we had never found any
dinosaurs at all but we may have found
evidence for evolution and evidence of
the in evidence the DNA is the thing
that contains the genes which is the
which is the unit of evolution
now imagine if we had they're very
similar universe the universe is
basically the same as ours but it's a
universe in which fossils had never been
found if somebody like me had come along
doing exactly a podcast like this and
then said well DNA allows things like
DNA would allow things almost like
dragons I'm not saying these dragons can
break the laws of physics I don't think
they'll probably be able to breathe fire
but I could imagine a flying dragon or I
could imagine a dragon that is you know
50 meters long lumbering around on the
on on on land I could imagine that that
biologists might very well say well
that's not possible
you know the limbs are too big it's too
heavy it wouldn't be able to get enough
oxygen into its lungs there's no way
these things could fly but of course we
know even though people in that universe
don't but dinosaurs are eminently
possible they were pterodactyls big
flying things that may as well have been
dragons without the breathing of the
fire there were brontosaurus and
Diplodocus you know there's really big
huge dinosaurs that were that ate trees
they were physically possible they
actually existed but I can imagine a
biologist being so incredulous and many
people being so incredulous if we didn't
have fossil evidence as to reject
outright even the possibility given DNA
that such a thing could evolve but they
can in our universe we happen to know
that they can now I don't know what the
repertoire of all different organisms is
it's infinite but it will be an
interesting I guess project to try and
figure out you know could you evolve and
animal with wheels I don't know could a
mammal evolve such that it can exist in
very sub-zero temperatures or above 100
degrees Celsius I don't know okay but
the these are things which are possible
or not given the DNA and so there are
things that are possible or not given
the laws of
but I think their Sam has echoed kind of
what I've said in the last episode in
the episode before that in the episode
before that which is something that
David emphasizes quite often is that the
quantum multiverse is simply determinism
it's it's a deterministic theory and it
unlike unlike certain other so-called
interpretations which are not
deterministic
they attempt to introduce randomness
into the world okay let's keep going
we've got the the next key bit by Brett
well I've never regretted not speaking
Mandarin more than I do right now but so
here's the thing I do I I resent the
many-worlds interpretation so there we
have it there it is
he resents the many-worlds
interpretation
it's an emotional reaction where else in
science is this a legitimate form of
criticism especially from an outsider
Brit will be right if at one of his
public lectures on evolutionary biology
to reject outright a conservative
religious person who stood up and said
that he resented the theory of evolution
by natural selection he would be right
to reject it as a legitimate criticism
it's not it's not a scientific criticism
it's a sign that the person is having a
visceral emotional reaction because they
don't understand it that's all it's no
sin not to understand something but it's
possibly a misstep - then get
exceedingly emotional about it to the
point where you're using a word like
resent now perhaps I'm reading too much
into resent until we hear the rest of
what he has to say I'm actually not
convinced that it's exactly wrong but I
am convinced that at best it is a very
stupidly explained
of phrasing something that nobody can
seem to phrase so that it is not insane
okay so we can take the point that
explanations are hard to come by and
difficult to express what did Karl
Popper say it is impossible to speak in
such a way as to not be misunderstood so
any explanation of a fundamental
phenomena is going to be difficult at
times for people to grok to understand
but insane and stupidly explains perhaps
the explanations that Brett has heard
have been stupidly explained or insane
to him it's not the sort of language I
think I've ever used about a scientific
explanation there might be two kinds of
people in the world who in encountering
a deep subtle explanation for the first
time if I could stand up by my mother
and my father my father will often be
somewhat like Brett Weinstein he will
say that's stupid and he will reject it
outright because it seems too outlandish
my mother on the other hand will just
say I don't understand it I don't get it
that's it so when it comes to the the
multiverse explanation I think it's
astonishing and when I first heard it I
thought that's astonishing that's
astounding that's surprising but as for
stupid and insane they're not normally
words that I tend to apply to scientific
theories Brett himself would have been
in the position that some physicists in
with respect to explaining aspects of
quantum theory Brett as a professional
biologists has probably delivered public
lectures where there's been conservative
religious people who've come up to him
after the lecture or perhaps during the
questions and being unable to fully
appreciate what Brett has been saying
about evolution by natural selection
Brett must know what it's like to deal
with a person who has an emotional a
visceral reaction to something new that
simply science
it is not a valid criticism for a
creationist to say evolution by natural
selection is the insane I mean they can
use those words if they like free speech
is permitted but it's not a valid
scientific criticism it's not a valid
philosophical criticism all it is is
throwing shade it's it's it's insults
it's not actually seriously engaging
with the theory evolution by natural
selection is an explanation of how the
diversity of species has arisen it's an
explanation of the similarity of DNA and
the similarity of physiological
structures it's an explanation of the
fossil record and as astonishing as it
might be too many people who hear it for
the first time or especially religious
people who believe that it runs counter
to their deeply held religious views it
merely running counter to deeply held
religious views or deeply held perpetual
errors that a person happens to carry
through their life is again no criticism
Brett will be right to dismiss a
religious person who was criticizing
okay in scare quotes because it's not a
valid genuine criticism but having a go
at evolution by natural selection on the
grounds that it's stupid or on the
grounds that it that it is insane so
just because the explanation that some
people have heard for neo-darwinism thus
far seems preposterous that's no reason
for thinking the theory or those who
endorse the theory are either stupid or
insane in fact it says far more about
the person levelling those allegations
against portions of the scientific
community because it's not a genuine
scientific criticism it's more
reflection in the case of the religious
person some kind of supernatural bias
the magical thinking and again as I've
said before I find it far more
astonishing to think that all of the
entities described by the equations of
quantum theory including the Schrodinger
wave equation all those many many
entities do not actually exist as the
theory says that they do but rather the
act
of observation causes them all to vanish
or from science and from reality leaving
only one that we do observe
that's a strange impulse to have a
psychological impulse that somehow
science is about you and your personal
psychology and capacity to observe
things rather like thinking that the
only planets that exist in the universe
are the one so far observed that would
be absurd the theory of planetary
formation extends beyond what we can
observe in two regions of the galaxy and
the universe that we have no hope of
observing right now but we know planets
are there no in the fallible sense not
know in the traditional I'm justified in
believing that such a theory is
absolutely true namely the existence of
planets beyond those that we can see so
far but rather an understanding that the
theory of planetary formation is deeper
than what our bare observations are
revealing to us so - in fundamental
quantum theory we may only observe
photons striking the screen at one place
at a time but the fact that they do
strike the screen at this place rather
than that place means that they've been
influenced by something unobserved
namely photons in other universes and
we've been through that anyway let's
keep going with Bret and Sam and what it
is the critters that I think on its face
the hardest thing to believe that still
is seemingly believed or at least paid
lip-service by a it might even be a
majority now of physicists maybe was the
last poll I heard it was something like
35% but it's it's it's getting there and
it's it is the strangest picture of
reality that you could you could imagine
okay the strangest picture of reality
that you could imagine well I just
simply disagree it's not it's not the
strangest picture of reality that you
could imagine that simp
a failure of imagination on Sam's part
but I don't think he actually really
believes that because there are many
things that are far stranger to imagine
that people have taken seriously over
the years
great minds David Lewis wrote on the
plurality of worlds a philosophical
Defense of many worlds but it wasn't
many physically possible worlds it was
all the logically possible worlds and so
he endorsed a kind of realism about this
and by the way David Wallace David
Deutsch David Lewis I don't know if you
have to be a David to really make
breakthroughs in many worlds but it
seems like it helps anyway so David
Lewis his book about on the plurality of
worlds talks about how all logically
possible worlds obtain some way in
reality that has to be an far infinitely
stranger and therefore more difficult to
imagine picture of reality on Sam
Harris's account then anything that
David Wallace David Deutsch or Hugh
Everett have ever come up with because
the many-worlds interpretation of
physical reality represents but a tiny
tiny sliver of all the possible
logically possible realities that are
out there or the logically possible
worlds because those other logically
possible worlds will obey different laws
of physics the physically possible
worlds of the multiverse all about set
to the same laws of physics and so the
the class of all different possible
logically possible worlds that is a far
far greater number and therefore a
stranger picture of reality but again I
just think it's it's kind of a failure
of imagination to think that there's
nothing stranger than this
I insist again that all physicists
endorse something like the Schrodinger
wave equation as a serious
representation of reality to some extent
those who do not endorse the many-worlds
interpretation say that the Schrodinger
wave equation in some way represents
reality prior to the act of observation
and then the act of observation
consciousness whatever you want to call
it the observer effect it's the thing
that causes the collapse of the
wavefunction so all the realities
P but one that we observe that to me is
more difficult to imagine and it's this
additional assumption that what the
equation is telling us about reality is
true until the act of observation when
it's the act of observation that is
bringing into reality what is true
that's an additional assumption over and
above what the many-worlds
interpretation is telling us the
multiverse just says that reality is
what quantum theory want the equations
of quantum theory describe that's it
we're not adding anything to it but
collapse models do they add something
they add this additional assumption that
observation is causing reality to be the
way that it is that's bizarre that's
really bizarre and as for hard to
believe that's far harder to believe
this idea that observation is the thing
that is causing little particles to do
one thing rather than another it's your
active observation that causes all the
realities to disappear but one and
therefore all of the electrons and
photons that happen to be in your
experiment to follow one path rather
than another
there's spooky action and addition
distance if ever there was something
this strange woowoo force coming out of
your brain and affecting subatomic
particles at a distance from you that
seriously is what collapse models are
insinuating about reality that makes no
sense
that's a weird metaphysical jump I don't
get it
but I wouldn't say that people who
endorse that are necessarily insane or
stupid or that's necessarily an insane
or stupid theory that's not a scientific
criticism but the criticism that you
must add additional assumptions like the
power of observation causes the vast
majority of reality described by the
equations of physics to disappear huh
that that is a fair criticism that we
shouldn't have such an assumption that
no assumption is needed because to
introduce such an assumption is merely
to try to get the theory to comport with
your biases with the biases that we're
hearing expressed here that it's just
too hard to imagine that it's difficult
to believe
doesn't matter if it's difficult to
believe evolution by natural selection
is difficult for some people to believe
but the difficulty in believing it has
no bearing whatsoever on the actual
correctness or otherwise of the theory
or of the explanation as being the best
explanation that we have let's get going
yeah I think you're being too nice it's
stupid
the idea that universes are spawned to
deal with the difference between the
thing I dropped hitting one carbon fiber
and the next time I think it's it's
hilarious to me I mean it Bret's having
an emotional reaction Brett one since
having an emotional reaction a very
negative visceral emotional reaction
here saying it's stupid it's insane I I
mean I I will get emotional about
science at times like this when people
are having ridiculous reactions I mean
there's no reason to say that it's
stupid because it's not it's not if you
understand it and I think it's
reasonably clear that he doesn't
understand it or that he's been
presented with a strange version that he
hasn't read the books of david deutsch
let's just say and i would recommend to
you Brett please pick up the fabric of
reality in particular the chapter called
shadows and if you're not convinced
after that mmm very well but I wouldn't
say that
people who write such books stupid or
insane and this is not this is not
reasonable philosophical discussion it
sounds measured and reasonable and Brett
under normal circumstances is a great
mind a great intellect I love listening
to him he's fantastic
as I say in terms of biology really
original thinker in certain respects I
think in terms of analyzing culture
right now both Brett and Sam brilliant
of that not everyone who steps outside
of their domain necessarily makes such
strange sweeping generalizations you
know I will comment frequently about
aspects of economics or history that I
don't necessarily have expertise in but
I don't usually regard even though with
whom I have a serious disagreement as
stupid or insane nor their theories
necessarily okay let's keep going
sorry that's not how nature works it's
it's a different view of parsimony than
then I have intuitively it's a total
rejection of parsimony just be most it
is the opposite of parsimony okay so
there we go he I guess misunderstands
parsimony and and I think Sam is about
to correct him on that by the way and
Sam does a very very good job of
correcting him on it as well I think but
parsimony is just this idea that you
shouldn't increase the number of
assumptions beyond what is absolutely
necessary in order to get your
explanation across now this is in my
mind it's the same as Occam's razor now
I've had university lecturers at some
point try and tell me the difference
between what parsimony is and Occam's
razor and I never got it I've never
understood it apparently they're subtly
different things parsimony versus
Occam's razor but I use them
interchangeably and I'm going to
continue to use them interchangeably
here for the moment unless someone can
provide me with direction on where I've
gone wrong and so given that they're
both about assumptions let's just go to
the fabric of reality where David writes
about this precise objection that the
many-worlds is somehow a rejection of
passed money or rejection of Occam's
razor this in fact was the criticism
that Paul Davies professor Paul Davies
had over the many-worlds interpretation
that it caused the number of universes
to multiply beyond all reason in order
to explain the one universe we do
observe but as Sam I think says in the
next bit that's a concern about the
bricks and mortar of the theory rather
than the assumptions in the theory now
I've already mentioned you know the idea
of exoplanets planets that are beyond
the solar system now we only found the
first one I think back in 1994 something
like that but our theory of planetary
formation prior to 1994 predicted that
there should be planets going around
other stars now it would be a violation
of Occam's razor not a correct use of it
a violation of Occam's razor to say
those planets do not exist that although
the theory of planetary formation says
gas giants and
little rocky terrestrial planets should
be orbiting perhaps a majority of stars
it would be wrong to say however to take
that theory seriously would cause the
number of planets throughout the galaxy
in the universe to proliferate beyond
all reason no well within reason and in
fact today we can see planets out to
what some I think thousand light years
going around stars here in the Milky Way
galaxy but it's not it's not very far ok
the other side of the galaxy is 120,000
light years away and the next nearest
galaxy is 2.2 million light years away
and we can see galaxies off to you know
many billions of light-years away we
have no hope at the moment with present
technology of seeing plants going around
stars in other galaxies but we know
there must be planets going around stars
in other galaxies because our best
theory of planetary formation says that
when a star forms it will form from a
cloud of gas and dust which will then
have a disk of material rotating around
that star some of which will come
together to form planets now that's a
very simple idea with very small number
assumptions leading to this
proliferation of matter the bricks and
mortar s Sam will come to say and so
proliferating the bricks in water is not
a violation of parsimony it's an
endorsement of but it's a correct use of
it so let's go to the fabric of reality
okay so David in this is in the chapter
called a conversation about
justification page 160 of my paper back
here and David is talking to a crypto
inductive us the entire chapter is a
refutation of the inductive aspetta of
knowledge and he's arguing with a person
about what the correct theory of gravity
is so it's in the context of what we
should think our correct theory of
gravity is and on the basis of what
should we think how correct theory of
gravity is the correct theory of gravity
so we're not going to go into that but
the entire argument that David is about
to use here that I'm about to read
applies in this situation so again just
to reinforce in people's minds we have
certain equations of quantum theory one
of which is called the Schrodinger wave
equation and the Schrodinger wave
equation explains what the Schrodinger
wave equation can be used
to describe all of the positions for
example that an electron has around the
nucleus of an atom let's say and so
these this gives us the wave function
and it predicts that the electron will
occupy multiple positions simultaneously
around the nucleus of an atom so the
electron is not in one spot it is
physically not in one spot according to
the equation now if we take that
equation seriously then we say okay so
the electron is not simply in one spot
it's in multiple different places at the
same time around the around the electron
but when we go to observe it we only
ever observe the electron at one place
and so this is why some physicists some
people who look into the theory say well
it's the act of observation that causes
the collapse so so it's said of the wave
function to one point and we see all the
possibilities disappear except for the
one that we do observe now that's an
additional assumption the act of
observation renders the equation invalid
prior to the act of observation the
equation is a description of reality but
the act of observation causes the
equation to cease to be universally
valid it's not valid at the point of
observation sometimes called the
observation problem but if we have
equations of orbital dynamics let's say
and thermodynamics that explain how
stars and planets form from gas clouds
and those equations describe how most of
the mass ends up at the center as a star
and the rest of the mass ends up forming
planets it would be ridiculous to say
again that those equations cease to be
valid except in cases where we can point
a telescope at a star and see the
planets orbiting the star no your active
observation isn't the thing that brings
reality into being the active
observation is just another part in the
chain of science it doesn't affect all
of reality but the collapse models which
includes the Copenhagen interpretation
and basically everything except the
many-worlds interpretation the
multiverse all of those say there is
this weird spooky action
distance where the act of observation
causes all the realities disappear but
one okay so that's the additional
assumption the additional assumption is
observation causes all the realities but
one to disappear okay so now I'm going
to use the fabric of reality in David's
words to criticize that and David writes
so your additional postulate is not just
super super Lewis it is positively bad
in general perverse but unrefuted
theories which one can propose
off-the-cuff fall roughly into two
categories there are theories that
postulate unobservable entities such as
particles that do not interact with any
other matter they can be rejected for
solving nothing Occam's razor if you
like and there are theories like yours
that predict unexplained observable
anomalies they can be rejected for
solving nothing and spoiling existing
solutions it is not I hasten to add that
they conflict with existing observations
it is that they remove the explanatory
power from those existing theories by
asserting that the predictions of those
theories have exceptions but not
explaining how okay I won't read the
rest there but that's perfect okay end
quote by the way that's exactly what
anyone who rejects the many-worlds
interpretation the multiverse as a
literal description of how reality is as
best we know in favor of any other
interpretation that adds this additional
assumption that again that causes them
to remove the explanatory power from the
existing theory so the existing theory
being that all these possible realities
still exist that's what the equations
say and to add this additional
assumption doesn't make things simpler
it ruins the explanatory power of that
existing theory okay so let's keep going
well they say actually I put this too
I think was max tegmark and in a podcast
I did with him I think it was max and it
was just a day just a different view of
parsimony it was not you know it was
kind of privileged in the the
mathematical parsimony over
the bricks-and-mortar parsimony I think
that that I mean it didn't meant all
said was not the result of adding lots
of assumptions or you know epicycles or
something that was jiggering a theory
it was just a brave acceptance of the
consequences of what this you know there
there we should say that and again you
know I'm not a physicist you know we
dragged your brother in here to get into
more of these details but there's no
picture of quantum reality that tracks
our common sense intuitions about how
the world should be so you're left
except in something at least at this
point that seems frankly bizarre but
many worlds seems about as bizarre as as
anything I could imagine again a failure
of imagination thereby saying but I
think everything else he says there is
absolutely fantastic that's fantastic
you're left believing something strange
no matter what you pick okay it it does
seem strange on first reading in the
same way that those lights in the sky
those little pinpricks of cold white
light that we see when we go out into a
bright night sky
I literally Suns like our own with
planets going around them that's
astonishing it's hard to believe when
you first hear as a child if you can
remember your mind being expanded by
that but as a child people are very
accepting they don't have all of these
irrational hang-ups about things some
older educated people do ok myself
included but we're hearing now of some
what I would say are hang-ups from
people now Sam also says there it's just
of the multiverse theory it's just a
brave acceptance of the theory now
that's that's that's telling I think
that is telling why brave why would one
need to be brave in order to expand this
theory would it have anything whatever
to do with being thought stupid or
irrational or someone who endorses a
stupid and irrational theory that when
you end up hearing those kind of again
scared
criticisms those kind of insults or
dismissive gestures really no wonder so
many physicists don't endorse it or
profess not to endorse it because it's a
reasonable I think fear to be thought
stupid and insane simply for explaining
what the science is now biologists used
to have to go through this not as much
anymore
but we all know about the Scopes Monkey
Trial don't we we know that biologists
historically have been attacked as
insane stupid heretics of some sort and
so rightly probably many didn't exactly
get on the pulpit and try to explain
evolution by natural selection now back
then we had religious people shutting
down the scientific debate now I'm not
saying the brits precisely shutting down
a scientific debate but it's in that
tradition that tradition of dismissing
as irrational people who are suggesting
something but not exactly new here I
mean we're talking about a theory that
was first proposed in what 1950s
something so it's been a while spin a
long time and as David Deutsch has
regretted it's such a shame that physics
in this area hasn't moved past concerns
about taking the theory seriously for
fear for fear of being thought stupid or
insane and hence Sam's quite right that
those who have taken up the charge by
taking this theory seriously are brave
and they should be lauded for having
done so in the face of people who are
not willing to engage seriously in the
debate but instead throwing shade one
might say which is unfortunate it's
unfortunate and again I think Brett's
better than this in the way he's come
off here maybe I'm being a bit half but
really stupid and insane let's keep
going no you're not left with accepting
again I'm not rejecting it in a formal
sense it may be an insane phrasing of
something that could be phrased
rationally from some other perspective
but as phrased it really is the
rejection of the idea of parsimony and
not for a good reason just because I
mean actually Eric does have a term for
this sort of thing I hope he won't
resent my applying it here I think he
would but desperation physics imagine
you know of saying of the theater Oh
Darwinism theory of evolution by natural
selection that the unit of selection
being the gene that is on DNA and that
code being Universal for life-forms
imagine simply rejecting that on the
basis of being desperation biology that
it's stupid and insane because it is
remarkable to think that whatever the
organism is it has a same the same code
the same DNA code and if you were to
look at two DNA strands side by side one
that was for bacteria and one that was
for a human being the average person
would barely be able to tell any
difference so in fact I'm pretty sure
you wouldn't be able to tell the
difference without properly analyzing it
in the laboratory somewhere that if you
simply magnified up the DNA strand DNA
strand and looked at the two double
helix ease you wouldn't notice much
difference so that's a remarkable a
remarkable idea that the information
genetic information can code for such to
vastly different structures a
microscopic organism on the one hand and
a fully functioning human being on the
other many things are astonishing there
would be interesting to ask Brett
Weinstein we know that for example
fossils are extremely hard to come by
they are a great series of coincidences
usually has to occur in order for a
dinosaur to have been fossilized so far
as we know a dinosaur has to die in a
shallow pool of mud and be covered over
rather quickly with more mud in an
anaerobic environment without oxygen so
the bacteria doesn't eat it
too quickly so that the bones can be
ossified turned to rock over time so
this series of coincidences has not
happened frequently we don't have that
many fossils we could be living in a
world where conditions were such that we
had almost no fossils at all perhaps
none let's say we lived in a world where
there were no fossils for whatever
reason the bacteria tended to eat things
more quickly than what they do so there
was no chance for the bones to be
ossified or we lived in a world where on
planet Earth the mud just wasn't the
deep enough so all of the dinosaurs that
ever died rotted away very quickly and
nothing ever got preserved okay I can
imagine a world like that I'm sure a
breton sam can imagine a world like that
imagine today therefore in such a world
if a boil just came along and said you
know what I think that in the past
although there is no record of it I
think in the past according to what I
know about DNA and genetics they're mine
of pain hundreds of million years ago
walking the earth dragon like creatures
that flew through the air perhaps they
didn't breathe fire from their mouths
but there were huge lumbering lizards 50
meters long or more weighing hundreds of
tonnes now that's a possibility in fact
we know that in our world that's a
reality to reject that as desperation
biology would be wrong it's it's a
testable theory that if you came up with
such a theory you might if you searched
long enough even in such a world find
some kind of evidence of that perhaps
you will find an egg preserved in amber
somewhere perhaps you'll find as they
did in Jurassic Park the blood inside a
mosquito preserved in tree sap somewhere
and then you'd be able to figure out
once you've done analysis of the the DNA
that's in there you'd find dinosaurs
okay but but as it is in our world we do
have fossils and so we don't have to
debate the reality of dinosaurs on
but we could be living in a world where
we would be okay let's keep going but
it's not even just forget about many
worlds for a second just imagine a
universe that is infinitely large right
now one of the the probabilistic
consequences of that scenario is that if
you just go far enough in any direction
again you run into the same problem
anything that can happen will happen an
infinite number of times right I mean
that's how big infinity is so that there
are an infinite number of identical
copies of us having infinitely similar
and and slightly different conversations
than this an infinite number of times
simply if you make the universe big
enough and that's it that just falls out
of probability theory right I don't
think the way that Sam's explained that
there is correct after all one could
have an infinite universe infinite in
size that is utterly featureless we may
live in a kind of universe like that
that beyond the horizon of what we can
see in the accelerating universe that
the universe just keeps getting larger
and larger and larger infinite though it
is and more and more sparse in the
distant future if the universe does in
fact last forever
under this accelerating dark energy
model eventually everything falls apart
and we have once again an infinite
universe on into an indefinite infinite
future where nothing happens because the
laws of physics are such that you won't
have anything happening you'll have the
heat death of the universe even though
it's the heat death of an infinitely
sized universe yeah that that's possible
what Sam's talking about is something
slightly different where the universe
has consistent density over time and
just an infinite amount of matter
I've heard I've heard philosophers make
this point before and I never found it
quite convincing they've got a
particular view of infinity in their
mind where all possible things happen
within this infinite universe but you
have to add assumptions about what the
kind of infinity is there for that to
work so far as I know okay whoa keep
going that's just a little Assad but
here's this was my point about
fractals actually and you know I'm
speaking a little bit out of my depth
here but my understanding is that
there's a problem with coastlines which
is that they get infinitely long the
closer you measure they approach
infinity in length as you get better at
measuring the nuances of a coastline
right that obviously doesn't make any
sense the coastline isn't getting bigger
because you're measuring more finally
well I know it makes sense I mean your
your ruler has to get infinitely thin
and small I mean you like you like but
the point is as we get down to the
Planck scale and as you ask them tote to
infinity right right you discover I
screwed up somewhere and it isn't my
ruler isel's just not awfully well in
this case sort of comes back to Zeno
like this is it you've applied Zeno's
paradox to measure in a coastline bingo
but the point is there is a way to do
this and it took somebody stepping back
and saying you know what math is going
to have to be we're gonna need a new
toolkit just the same way Newton and
Leibniz discovered a toolkit for people
don't like it when I say it this way but
for calculating the incalculable which
is what calculus did as I see it but
anyway the point is I think the
many-worlds interpretation is a best
answer to a problem that is phrased so
incorrectly that we can't that just as
if you asked the question about where
these creatures came from three thousand
years ago nobody had Darwinism to offer
so there wasn't even a way to begin to
phrase the answer credibly you could say
well then that leaves you picking
between
deities who might have done it and
really what we're after is figuring out
which one it was when in fact it wasn't
any of them it was processes that were
understandable but we didn't yet have
the mechanism to do so so I think that's
where we are in that case okay so they
they and I think Brett's done this a
couple of times now he said he's not
formally rejecting it but he's saying it
stupid and insane then he's saying it's
a best answer to a question that's
poorly phrased but then he said of
stupid and insane so there's a little
inconsistency he
if it's the best answer to the question
phrased poorly or not then it can't be
stupid and insane can it it's just it is
the best answer it actually is the best
answer it's the best explanation of what
the equations say could it be wrong
absolutely it could be wrong absolutely
it could be wrong but and this is why I
say I don't believe in scientific
theories the word belief shouldn't have
a place here we shouldn't believe our
scientific theories but we should take
them seriously that's quite a different
thing that that given our best answer
take our best answer seriously and when
we say take it seriously take it
seriously so don't get all emotional
about it use it in order to make
progress in particular use it in order
to make quantum computers and yes in
order to understand the operation of a
quantum computer you have to assume that
the computations are being done
somewhere in reality and it's clearly
not in our physical universe because
it's not enough matter in our physical
universe in order for the quantum
computation to take place so it's being
done somewhere and that somewhere is in
these parallel universes but we'll come
to that at another point yeah it might
be and it's hard to see what we're not
seeing here can't even dimly imagine but
it it does seem like I mean is it is a
fairly straightforward claim that the
again the the the infinite case is even
simpler because it's just you know it
doesn't require any notion of universes
splitting but it's it's hard to know
where to where to bite the bullet I
think I think the thing to recognize
would the these counterintuitive
consequences of infinity is just how
counterintuitive infinity is I mean
infinity is not just really really big
right right and and our intuition that
that it's just really really big no the
rules change when you when you put that
symbol of infinity on the on the paper
right right there's a very big number if
we can agree
in an infinitely large universe
somewhere at some point in fact an
infinite number of places an infinite
number of times
a asteroid will have hit another
asteroid an aardvark will have been
formed absent an atmosphere immediately
died and disintegrated into a bizarrely
large petunia of a unusual color write
an infinite number of times
I'm telling inverse compatible with the
law of laws of physics will have happen
an infinite number of times yes I don't
believe that has ever happened anywhere
in the universe and I believe that
actually what we will ultimately come to
understand is that the universe has to
be limited in a way that that actually
won't have occurred ever well but one
easy way to bound that is just say that
it's we don't live in an infinite
universe
all right big it is it's just it's not
very rosy being right infinite sam sam
says he that anything physically
possible that can happen will happen and
brett objection the idea that he's just
thought of something preposterous he
just came up with a preposterous thing a
Harry Potter universe type scenario as I
explained in the last episode you know
this thing where two asteroids come
together and an aardvark appears okay
well yeah it's it's it's hard to believe
and say it's happened an infinite number
of times is to misunderstand the point
that David makes about measures of the
universe so I it's an exceedingly small
measure of universes where that happens
infinite though it might be infinite in
terms of number okay we don't count
universes that way we have a measure of
universes and it's exceedingly selim
measure of universes where that happens
so again this is a misunderstanding of
infinity to say that just because it
happens an infinite number of times and
that it seems preposterous that that
alone is a refutation seeming
preposterous is not a refutation of a
theory you need to have something more
than looking at a consequence of a
theory having an emotional reaction to
it and rejecting the entire theory on
the basis of your objection to our
particular consequence it doesn't matter
how preposterous it is again the theory
of evolution by natural selection on
religious understandings
has preposterous consequences like an
intelligent designer is not needed to
guide the evolution of species according
to a realtor person that that's
preposterous it's hard for them to
understand
so bread is in the position of being a
kind of religious person here he's
religious about his own common sense I
suppose that because this thing violates
his own sense of common sense he's
rejecting it but not on any scientific
grounds not only in rational
philosophical system illogical grounds
but emotional grounds it seems too
preposterous
it's insane it's stupid and so on yes I
worry about this particularly definitely
large isn't infinite and the differences
here yeah yeah well I agree
so all right back to free well I just
I'll tell you I think you if you want to
close the door to many worlds or at
least beat your intuitions into shape
there I think you should probably have
either David Deutsch or Sean Carroll on
your podcast because they're both all in
on that all in I love it I all I'd want
to do is bet against it you know I'm
certain to be right and it's easy money
so ok back to free will I couldn't agree
more
Brett one saying you should have a chat
with David Deutsch that would be great
and if you think you're certain to win
your money you could have a I'll give
you a $5 bet that you will be convinced
so long as you remain open-minded about
this yes so I think that's where we'll
end that part ok well will end will end
the podcast there will and I've been
talking about it for a long time now but
I just thought this is this is
emblematic of what you do hear less
frequently these days with respect to
the many-worlds interpretation as Sam
said there might be a majority opinion
I'm not sure about majority the last
survey I saw and it was only a very
small survey of physicists was was
around a 30% mark something like that
but whatever the case this kind of
criticism I did hear far more frequently
and you do hear it from laypeople very
frequently that it's ah that's
ridiculous
that's insane how could you believe
anything like that and so on well I
don't believe it as I've said before it
simply is they best the best the only
literal way to understand the equations
of quantum theory the other the other
attempts the other theories are the
other theories are hedges and an
additional assumptions and violations of
Occam's razor and so on we don't change
the rules about you know the the the
equations of general relativity the
equations of general relativity describe
a curved space-time where space itself
is literally curves and this is why we
get orbits having the shape that they do
this is why we can have GPS but could
you imagine an instrumentalist coming
along and saying all those equations
from general relativity useful though
they are that's merely a fiction they
can be used to create a predictive model
of where a planet will be around the
star at any given point that can be used
for GPS but as for this literally
describing curved space-time and
explaining gravity as it is no I reject
all that the equations don't actually do
that I haven't heard physicists really
make this point I think there are some
but even though I don't think that
general relativity is the final word on
the nature of gravity and space and time
it is there the best approximation that
we have so far there is nothing to rival
it so - with the multiverse
understanding of the equations of
quantum theory like the Schrodinger wave
equation it's just taking that literally
now do i assume that in the future we
will utterly refute athle refute the
curved space-time model I think we're as
likely to utterly utterly overturn in
almost all respects the theory of curved
space-time as described by general
relativity Einstein in the same way that
we're likely to uh turley overturn
the multiverse interpretation and that
is about as likely to happen as the
decoupling of DNA from genetics for a
biology in the future to come along and
to find that DNA has absolutely nothing
to do with genetics and evolution that
would be astonishing to me now I do
think that the current understanding of
DNA and evolution in genetics will be
overturned but not in all respects as I
think the many-worlds understanding of
quantum theory will be overturned and
general relativity will be overturned
but not in all respects we will come to
see these theories as approximations to
some still deeper theory as special
cases of some deeper theory if anything
maybe something like David Lewis's model
will end up being more correct in which
case the many-worlds interpretation from
quantum theory is just a special case
but these other logically possible
worlds might exist or some portion of
them might exist some universes with
different laws of physics might exist
mixed max tegmark written these books
about the many different versions of
many worlds ok and I've been like you
know enjoy enjoyed David Lewis's book
the plurality of worlds but could is
because it is the largest possible
superset of all realities all the
logically possible things that could
possibly happen and the physically
possible things are just a small part of
that so indeed after all that we've got
Bret and Sam really balking at the idea
of the many-worlds interpretation I
think precisely because it violates
their common sense it violates almost
everyone's common sense the first time
we hear about it but once you learn the
details then it comports with common
sense and other versions of trying to
understand quantum theory other things
that are a violation of common sense so
let's go back to the beginning of
infinity finally I'm on page 279 for
what that's worth and I'll begin reading
there and David writes here is another
situation where if we are
not careful common sense makes false
assumptions about the physical world and
can make descriptions of situations
sound paradoxical even though the
situation's themselves are quite
straightforward
Dawkins gives an example in his book
unweaving the rainbow analyzing the
claim that a television psychic was
making accurate predictions and this is
the quote from unweaving the rainbow
there are about a hundred thousand
five-minute periods in a year the
probability that any given watch say
mine will stop in a designated 5-minute
period is about 1 in 100,000 low odds
but there are 10 million people watching
the television psychic show if only half
of them are wearing watches we could
expect about 25 of those Watchers to
stop in any given minute if only a
quarter of these ringing to the studio
that is 6 calls more than enough to
dumbfound a naive audience especially
when you add in the calls from people
whose watches stop the day before people
whose watches didn't stop but whose
grandfather clocks did people who died
of heart attacks and their bereaved
relatives phoned in to say that their
ticker gave out and so on end quote from
unweaving the rainbow continuing with
beginning of infinity as this example
shows the fact that certain
circumstances can explain other events
without being in any way involved in
causing them is very familiar despite
being counterintuitive the naive
audiences mistake is a form of
parochialism they observe a phenomenon
people phoning in because of their
watches having stopped but they are
failing to understand it as part of a
wider phenomenon most of which they did
not observe though the unobserved parts
of that wider phenomenon have no having
no way affected what we the viewers
observe they are essential to its
explanation
similarly common-sense and classical
physics contain the parochial error that
only one history exists this error built
into our language and conceptual
framework makes it sound odd to say that
an event can be in one sense extremely
unlikely and in another certain to
happen but there is nothing odd about it
in reality just pause there my
reflection so this is precisely the
objection that Brett articulated in his
podcast with Sam where he was talking
about the art
vark that apparently appears after an
asteroid impact the concern that that
that however unlikely it's a possibility
is just an argument from incredulity
some things are unlikely to happen there
is a very small measure of universes
where this happens and it's not a
refutation of the entire theory to say
that one struggles to accept that
reality ok I'm skipping a bit and
David's talking about the spaceship
still and on this starship spaceship he
talks about how there's a captain of the
spaceship and there's a navigator of the
spaceship and if we could see from a
God's eye view the entire multiverse
that how the spaceship is representing
the multiverse we would see a flurry of
different instances of the captain and
the navigator but we would notice that
only one instance of the captain ever in
in interacts with an instance of one
instance of the captain ever interacts
with an instance of the navigator so
there must be information within the
instances to tell the captain and the
navigator which of them should interact
with which on that point David says the
upshot is that our laws of it quote the
upshot is that our laws of physics must
also say that every object carries
within it information about which
instances of it could interact with
which instances of other objects except
when the instances are fungible when
there is no such thing as which quantum
theory describes such information it is
known as entanglement information so far
in the story we have set up a vast
complex world which looks very
unfamiliar in our minds eye but to the
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants
looks almost exactly like the single
universe of our everyday experience end
of classical physics plus some
apparently random jiggling whenever the
transporter operates a tiny minority of
the histories have been significantly
affected by very unlikely events but
even in those the information flow what
effects what is still very tame and
familiar for instance a version of the
starships log that contains records of
bizarre coincidences will be perceptible
to people who remember those
coincidences but not to other instances
of those people
thus the information in the fictional
multiverse flows along a branch
in tree whose branches histories have
different thicknesses measures and never
a join once they have separated each
behaves exactly as if the others did not
exist if that were the whole story that
multiverses imaginary laws of physics
would still be fatally flawed as
explanations in the same way that they
have been all along there would be no
difference between their predictions and
those of much more straightforward laws
say saying that there is only one
universe one history in which the
transporter randomly introduces a change
in the objects that it teleports
under those laws instead of branching
into two autonomous histories on such
occasions the single universe randomly
does or does not undergo such a change
thus the entire stupendously complicated
multiverse that we have imagined with
its multiplicity of entities including
people walking through each other and
it's bizarre occurrences and it's
entanglement information would collapse
into nothing like the galaxy in chapter
2 that became an emulsion floor the
multiverse explanation of the same
events would be a bad explanation and so
the world would be inexplicable to its
inhabitants if it were true skipping a
small part in david writes in quantum
physics information flow in the
multiverse is not as time as in that
branching tree of histories I have
described this is because of one further
quantum phenomena under certain
circumstances the laws of motion allow
histories to rejoin become fungible
again this is the time reverse of the
splitting differentiation of history
into two or more histories that I have
already ascribed so a natural way to
implement it in our fictional
multiverses for the transporter to be
capable of undoing its own history
splitting ok so now I'm I'm pausing the
reading there and I'm going to explain
what David has written rather than just
read it verbatim so this is almost
reading but more of a summary of what's
being said here ok so here's a diagram
that represents the splitting of the
universe from one state that it's in X
into two states x and y and x represents
the normal voltage and y is the
anomalous one that the transporter
causes and this diagram represents what
interference is again we
the X&Y the two different voltages they
can join together again and this is what
interference is interference phenomenon
david defines there as where
differentiated histories rejoin and now
I'll read a little bit and he writes
interference is the phenomenon that can
provide the inhabitants of the
multiverse with evidence of the
existence of multiple histories in their
world without allowing the histories to
communicate for example suppose that
they run the transporter twice in quick
succession
I should explain in a moment what quick
means and here we have a diagram showing
X splitting into X and y and then
rejoining and get into X so we've got
differentiation and then interference if
they did this repeatedly would say
different copies of the transporter on
each occasion they could soon infer that
the intermediate result could not be
just randomly X or Y because if it were
then the final result then the final
outcome would sometimes be Y because X
could split into x and y while in fact
it is always X thus the inhabitants
would no longer be able to explain away
what they say by assuming that only one
randomly chosen value of the voltage is
real at the intermediate stage okay and
then David goes on to speak more about
entanglement and the rejoining of
histories and I'm skipping a little bit
there and David writes in our story just
as we did not allow splitting to happen
in a way that would allow communication
faster than light so we must ensure the
same for interference the simplest way
is to require that the rejoining take
place only if no wave of differentiation
has happened that is to say the
transporter can under the voltage search
only if this has not yet caused any
differential effects on anything else
when a wave of differentiation set off
by two different values x and y of some
variable has left an object the object
is entangled with all the differentially
affected objects and here we have a
lovely little diagram explaining what
not entangled is about when you've got
two objects x and y those are not
entangled with the rest of the world if
x and y if the rest the world is not
differentially affected by X into I on
the other hand entangled may
the rest of the world can be affected by
X while Y will be will affect the rest
of the world differently compared to X
and that's what entangle is about
entanglement is and David writes beneath
that diagram so our rule in short is
that interference can happen only in
objects that are unentangled with the
rest of the world this is why in the
interference experiment the two
applications of the transporter have to
be in quick succession
although alternatively the object in
question has to be sufficiently well
isolated for its voltages not to affect
its surroundings so we can represent a
generic interference experiment
symbolically as shown ok and here's the
diagram of that we've got X and the rest
of the world so X is in the world
somewhere but it splits then it
differentiates into X and y but the rest
of the world is not being affected by x
and y differentially affected as he says
there and interferences where x and y
can merge together again to become
fungible once more and the rest of the
world is still not differentially
affected by x and y a pause they're just
my reflection this is the difficult part
for engineers trying to build quantum
computers because we need the objects to
not be entangled with the rest of the
world this is the concept of decoherence
when the objects that are performing the
computations within the quantum computer
become entangled at the rest of the
world and therefore the information
about the computation is lost now I
might just go to the emergent multiverse
on this for a moment this is David
Wallace's book and Wallace in the book
write say a bit about entanglement but I
just want to mention here what David
said about a little bit earlier about
how interference experiments provide
that a well would be evidence and he's
about to come to the fact thing he's
going to say that interference
experiments provide provide the main
source of evidence for the many-worlds
interpretation for the multiverse now
there is another kind of evidence as
well
we don't fully have it yet this evidence
but we will when quantum computers are
built and this is what David Wallace
writes about David Deutsch talking about
the evidence that would come from from
quantum computation which of course is a
form of interference experiment but
anyway and and Wallace is just
explaining about Neutron interferometry
which is a form of interference
experiment but using neutrons and
Wallace writes David Wallace writes in
his book in a sense of course this
discussion of quantum computation tells
us nothing philosophical that we didn't
already know from Neutron interferometry
the really crucial step is from one
layer of reality to no more than one and
the further considerations here are just
quantitative changes nonetheless there
is something rather striking about the
idea of empirical proof that such a huge
number of different realities must exist
Deutsch puts it this way quoting David
Deutsch now when Shor's algorithm has
factorized the number say 10 to the
power of 500 also times the
computational resources that can be seen
to be present where was the number
factorized there are only about 10 to
the power of 80 atoms in the entire
visible universe an utterly minuscule
number compared with 10 to the power of
500 so if the visible universe were the
extent of physical reality physical
reality would not even remotely contain
the resources required to factorize such
a large number who did factorize it then
how and where was the computation
performed deutsch 1997 page 217 so that
is from the fabric of reality I'm going
to continue reading Wallace's reflection
on what has just said there Wallace says
now if by this Deutsch means that the
very fact of the calculation entails
multiple universes he has overstated the
case it is unproven that there are no
classical algorithms for
efficient factorization and it is not
logically impossible that the
calculations that the calculation just
happens by magic as if as it were
without any detailed account at all
there is no logical contradiction
although it goes against everything we
have learned in science in the
supposition that the laws of physics
must contain primitive factorization
implementing processes so to pause there
my reflection on Wallace's reflection on
do it yeah okay
the magic is not logically impossible
but we don't live in a world of magic so
I think it's a fair criticism to say
that although something might be
logically possible if it entails the
supernatural or magic that's and that's
something unexplained a science consists
of good explanations so you can always
put a God of the gaps in a and then
magic happens and then a wizard did it
as David likes to say but this is not a
good explanation but Wallace comes back
to rightly give George credit here and
Wallace writes but to object thus is to
miss the point which is not that there
could be no other explanation for the
factorization but that we actually have
a good in principle thoroughly testable
explanation namely it involves simple
well understood algorithms operating in
a massively parallel way within a single
computer it presumes that each
computation happens independently the
empirical prediction is that everything
will happen as if at the computer is if
each computation is occurring
independently and there is no way of
explaining the actual computational
process taking place which does not
assume the computations are happening
independently by deutsches criterion
then there is no way of so explaining
the algorithm which does not accept the
reality of all the independent
computations at least within the quantum
computer there would be many worlds and
quote from Wallace there and that's
exactly right it will be and I think
this is why physicists are coming around
to the many-worlds interpretation
because they can see all the progress
and all of the energy being devoted to
quantum computation and they understand
that argument
putting aside other kinds of
interference experiments which should
already be convincing but if we are on
the verge I don't know how close we
aren't no one knows how close we are to
having fully functional quantum
computers then it will be very difficult
to deny what Wallace has said there
where are in Dorchester where are these
computations being taking place if a
quantum computer is computing things
that would require more than all the
matter in the visible universe operating
at switching speed to the speed of light
and so on if it can't physically be done
in this universe it's being done
somewhere else it's being done by
harnessing the resources of quantum
computers and other realities but in
other physical realities and by the way
this this book is absolutely brilliant
if you're really interested in this
topic then this is the book for you once
you've read fabric of reality in the
beginning of infinity but it is highly
technical I might just mention as well
I've been a what Wallace would regard as
a wavefunction realist but if you get
into the if you get down into the weeds
about this he says that we shouldn't be
wavefunction realists wavefunction
realist is just someone who says well
take the wavefunction literally okay and
the wavefunction if you draw a graph of
it I won't bother to do that now maybe
next time but let's say you're trying to
describe the position of an electron
around a nucleus then the wavefunction
kind of looks like a a Gaussian curve
the bell curve normal distribution okay
it can look something like that so it's
highly probable to be in the center
wherever the center happens to represent
and less probable to be elsewhere but
the point is with respect to the
multiverse that it it isn't in one
single place the wavefunction maps all
the different places that it could be
you square the wavefunction and you get
the probability function so you find it
and the amplitude tells you the
probability that you know how high the
bell curve happens to be at any
particular point tells you the
probability of finding the electron at
that place we would say however it gives
you the measure of Univ
versus where that electron is going to
be around the nucleus anyway I digress a
little bit I just want to mention what
Wallace says about that and he writes is
some page 316 of the emergent multiverse
if we take non relativistic quantum
particle mechanics as our paradigm
quantum theory there is one fairly
obvious possible way to make sense of
the quantum state it is typically
represented as a wavefunction on
configuration space so just take that
literally on this reading which is
called wavefunction realism according to
him quantum mechanics is not a theory of
events in 3 plus 1 dimensional
space-time at all it is a theory of a
complex field evolving in a very high
dimensional space if we could treat the
whole observable universe non
relativistic Lee for example the space
would have 10 to the power of 80
dimensions wave function realism was
first explicitly proposed and discussed
by Albert it has been criticized on the
grounds that it fails to provide the
kind of ontology that can rewrite
records at facts about 3-dimensional
objects in their behavior from this
books point of view though such concerns
missed the point all that is needed is
that we recover high-level ontology at a
structural level and I'm skipping a
little bit in he writes that the
problems with wavefunction realism is he
says wavefunction realism misrepresents
the structure of quantum mechanics by
singling out the position basis for a
special treatment secondly it is
difficult at best to extend it to
quantum field theory where no single
basis seems to have the preferred status
which the position basis might arguably
said to have in nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics and this position basis means
we're privileges ition rather than some
other physical aspect of a given
particle and wallace goes on to say some
more here there but he says IC
wavefunction realism as in general an
unhelpful way to think about the
ontology of quantum mechanics that's
just an extra ever end quote there this
is just an extremely technical point
because I have heard people recently as
I have been as well talking about taking
the wavefunction purely
literally as I have indeed in this video
especially so it's a minor technical
point but this is this goes no way to
denying the fact that after all this
book is precisely about the multiverse
that these multiple histories this
multiple physical realities really do
exist
okay so I'll continue reading from the
beginning of infinity David writes quote
once the object is entangled with the
rest of the world in regard to the
values x and y no operation on the
object alone can create interference
between those values instead the
histories are merely split further in
the usual way and here's a diagram on
page 284 it's a in this picture here we
have an object X and the rest of the
world is unaffected by the object that
object X is then split into two
different copies of differentiates into
X and y and the rest of the world is not
affected by either X or Y entanglement
then means that object X big has an
effect on the rest of the world while
object Y has a different effect on the
rest of the world and then the splitting
can continue and as David writes and a
blurb underneath that in entangled
objects further splitting happens
instead of interference and he continues
to write when two or more values of a
physical variable have differently
affected something in the rest of the
world knock-on effects typically
continue indefinitely as I have
described with a wave of differentiation
entangling more and more objects if the
differential effects can all be undone
then interference between those original
values becomes possible again but the
laws of quantum mechanics dictate that
undoing them requires fine control of
all the affected objects and that
rapidly becomes infeasible the process
of it becoming infeasible is known as
decoherence in most situations
decoherence is very rapid which is why
splitting typically predominates over
interference and why interference the
ubiquitous on microscopic scales is
quite hard to demonstrate unambiguously
in the laboratory nevertheless it can be
done and quantum interference phenomena
constitute our main evidence of the
existence of the multiverse and of what
its laws are a real life analog of the
above experiment is standard in quantum
optics
laboratory's instead of experimenting on
voltmeters whose many interactions with
their environment quickly caused a
coherence one uses individual photons
and the variable being acted upon is not
voltage but which of two possible paths
the photon is on instead of the
transporter one uses a simple device
called a semi silvered mirror
represented by the grey sloping bars in
the diagrams below and there we have the
mark the beginnings of the mark sending
interferometer which David Deutsch goes
ahead and explains in the next few pages
so this is where I will end this
particular episode because we've
explained that in a previous episode and
go back to I think two episodes or so on
three episodes perhaps now and another
reason to read the book if you're still
struggling to understand any of this
there's the whole point of these this
series is to help us all understand the
book a little better and I explained
things slightly differently to the way
David has explained things but
encountering the explanation in two
different ways about the mark Zehnder
interferometer is very important and you
can find in fact um the author of this
book David Wallace on YouTube explaining
the mark Zehnder interferometer
experiment as well so this this idea of
entanglement where we have these
particles unentangled with the rest of
the world this is what goes on inside a
quantum computer so we have these
particles interacting inside of the
quantum computer not entangle with the
rest of the world if they get entangled
with the rest of the world then it's
like the information is kind of I don't
know if David would like it to be put
this way but then the information kind
of links out into the rest of world it
becomes entangled the rest the world and
then you lose you lose the quantum
computation and at the moment the
engineering seems to be concentrating on
how to ensure that the particles remain
coherent together they don't decohere
and the common way of attempting to do
this appears to be keeping the particles
at low temperature I happen to be
wearing a shirt I've been wearing for
this episode
see that that it's um from the
University of New South Wales here in
Australia and they have a Center for
quantum computation and I visited there
a few times and they have this
remarkable way of trying to do quantum
computation suffice to say the
temperatures need to be exceedingly low
because the sinners temperatures get
high the particles start to vibrate too
much and the information that then the
particles then become entangled with the
rest of you know reality now to get the
temperature down really low well they
use liquid helium as one would expect
but an interesting part about this story
is that liquid helium itself isn't cold
enough for what they need to do and so
then it is special isotopes they first
the first stage of cooling is to use
normal liquid helium which is expensive
enough but for the second stage of
cooling they use an isotope helium-3 I
believe and the helium-3 isotope then
boils away from the rest of the helium
that they have and that lowers the
temperature even further it's like a
refrigeration effect and evaporative
cooling effect using liquid helium where
an isotope of liquid helium boils away
taking additional heat with it now where
do they get the leak the helium-3 from
well one of the sponsors one of the
sponsors of the University of New South
Wales quantum computation project so
they told me was the American army and
the American army not only invested in
their project military likes to invest
in computational projects but they also
supply them with helium-3 where would
they get helium-3 from apparently
decommissioned nuclear bombs nuclear
weapons give off this isotope of
helium-3 and so they collect it and
again if I remember correctly and I'm
sure someone will let me know if I get
this wrong they said that a balloon full
of the gas not full of the liquid but a
balloon full of the gas is something
like $10,000 worth that's how much costs
for this isotope of helium 3 that's how
rare it is and so they use this out at
the University of New South Wales in
order do quantum computation because I
need to keep things cool so that they
don't decohere okay that's where we'll
end it today we'll have one more episode
on the multiverse and then we'll be
moving on to the next chapter
so again hope you're enjoying this if
you do feel the urge to contribute to my
patreon account you can find me on
patreon or PayPal as well and I have a
donate button on our website thank you
very much for any and all support and
thank you for your comments on YouTube
thank you for your feedback on Twitter
it's all very valuable see you next time
bye
[Music]